##Dataset Structure

The project utilizes the large-scale aerial image dataset called VisDrone2019 Detection Dataset that is captured by using drone-mounted cameras in urban areas. This dataset is divided into several subdirectories: VisDrone2019-DET-train, VisDrone2019-DET-val, VisDrone2019-DET-test-dev and VisDrone2019-DET-test-challenge. There are two separated folders for images and labels in each split (the images are in .jpg format, and the labels are in .txt format). The annotation files are in a "YOLO" format with each line being an object with a class ID and normalized coordinates for the bounding box (center_x, center_y, width, height). Out of the images in the training set, 5926 images and 6471 label files containing multiple object categories (such as pedestrian, people, bicycle, car, van, truck, tricycle, awning-tricycle, bus) were detected during dataset analysis. The main focus in this project was on detecting the pedestrian, people and car classes, as the objective of this project is human and car detection. The number of human related objects, car instances, and the number of dense object labels per image of the dataset was determined using statistical analysis and is approximately 32,945, 21,265, and 51.8 respectively.

##Preprocessing and Augmentation:

The training of the detection model was preceded by several pre-processing and augmentation steps. First, all annotation files were read, and the image-label pairs were ensured by verifying the correspondence between images and their labels and the validity of the image's bounding box information. As only human and car detection are used in the project, the original dataset was filtered to select only the desired classes. The pedestrian and people classes were combined into one class, people and the car class remained separate. Images without any objects of interest were excluded to minimize the training noise and enhance the training efficiency. Then a new YOLO formatted data set was built, with only two classes: human and car, and a new data.yaml file for YOLO training. Further, trainable image dimensions were kept constant by resizing and normalizing the images. Augmentation was performed on images to increase model generalization and robustness, including horizontal flipping, random scaling, cropping, brightness and contrast adjustment. To check the quality of the annotations and correct preprocessing, sample visualizations with bounding boxes were also created.

##Problems identified in the Dataset.

Several problems were noticed while exploring the data sets and pre-processing the data sets. Small object detection was one of the challenges as the images were taken from high altitudes of the drone, making the human and vehicle objects very small in many of the images. There were some pedestrians which were only a few pixels, making it hard to detect accurately. The second challenge was the fact that there were images with overlapping objects, so the localization and classification were more difficult. It was also found that the data was highly imbalanced, with some classes (like bicycle or ignored regions) having majority annotations and others (like target classes) having minority annotations. A big scale difference was noticed, depending on the drone's height in the air and the angle of the camera. Furthermore, the images in the data set were captured from varying lighting conditions, different viewpoints and resolution, adding to the variance of the training process. These difficulties introduced a very realistic and complicated dataset that demanded a well-processed dataset and powerful training techniques to perform accurate detection of human and car.
